Water Bit Mask Generation via Fully Convolutional Network at the Alaska Satellite Facility

Summer 2019 Student interns at the Alaska Satellite Facility (ASF) have developed software written in Python 3 and running on Amazon Web Services (AWS) to identify water in Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) satellite images using a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN).  The output of the FCN is a bit mask indicating the location of water in a SAR image.  This project is composed of two halves: the training data generator and the FCN.

The training data generator (code-named "water_mark") uses the ASF HyP3 on demand SAR processing system to perform radiometric terrain correction (RTC) on a collection of dual-pol (VV, VH) SAR images, applies a statistical algorithm to each VV, VH pair to generate an approximation of the "ground truth" bit mask, tiles and labels the images and mask into 512X512 pixel tiles, then "grooms" the data by removing bad image mask pairs and hand tuning masks where appropriate.  Currently, we have processed approximately 40 SAR granules yielding 20 GB of high quality training Data.  This training data was uploaded to an AWS S3 bucket to provide convenient access.

The FCN is built with Keras, an open-source neural network library running on TensorFlow.  The FCN uses the Unet Architecture for semantic segmentation allowing each pixel to be labeled.  To allow this project to scale and meet ASF's needs the FCN can be run on AWS EC2 resources.

So far the results are very promising with testing and training accuracy greater than 90%.  However, validation and accuracy in machine learning can be deceptive and difficult to interpret; in our case the "ground truth" is unknown.  To address these questions several metrics were collected and various data visualization techniques were used: charts of accuracy vs. epoch, loss vs. epoch, and GIFs of the masks developing.

Ongoing development of  this software could be of interest to remote sensing scientists for land masking and speckle filtering.

